---
layout: post
title:  "Unit API + Spring Boot"
author: Simon Schneider
date:   2021-02-26 09:21:55 +0100
categories: spring-boot unit-api
image: /img/posts/2021-02-26-unit-api-header.png
---

**TLDR;** If you work with SI-Units/Quantities in your application, try out the [Unit API](https://github.com/raynigon/unit-api/) which is an implementation of [JSR-385](https://www.jcp.org/en/jsr/detail?id=385) with focus on the SI System redefinition, modularity and support for Java SE 8.
It integrates well into various Frameworks, Libraries and Languages, such as Spring Boot, Hibernate, Jackson, Kotlin and more.  

# Introduction

In the late 90s NASA send a sattelite to Mars, which should study the martian climate, atmosphere and surface changes and also act as a communications relay.
After a successful 10 months of travel to Mars, on Sepmtember 23 1999 communications with the spacecraft was lost and never restored.
During orbital insertion the Mars Climate Orbiter burned and broke into pieces.
After extensive investigations a NASA review board found that the problem was in the software controlling the orbiter’s thrusters. 
The software calculated the force that the thrusters needed to exert in pounds of force. 
A second piece of code that read this data **assumed** it was in the metric unit—"newtons per square meter".
The interface was specified to read/write the data in "newtons per square meter", 
but this interfaces was not tested properly as NASA confirmed.
The building costs of the 338-kilogram robotic space were $125 million.
<br />
<br />
This Story shows the problem of conversion between different units and there specification in interfaces.
Usually an interface allows to only send the value of a quantity and not the unit it was specified with.
Therefore this mistakes happend and will be happening if interfaces are designed in this way.
We have also seen, that this kind of errors can have fatal consequences, in this instance $125 million.
A possible solution is to use more complex data types which allow the specification of a unit in the interface.

# JSR-385

# Unit API with Jackson

# Unit API with Hibernate