---
layout: post
title:  "Rayd.io on the Raspberry Pi"
author: Simon Schneider
date:   2021-02-28 14:00:00 +0100
categories: spring-boot unit-api
header_image: /img/posts/2021-02-26-raydio-header.png
# Social Media
# image: /img/posts/2021-02-26-unit-api-card.png
# description: Try out the unit-api it integrates well into Spring Boot, Hibernate, Jackson, Kotlin and more
twitter:
  username: raynigon
---
# Introduction
I went to visit my parents, during the pandemic, it didnt happen as often as before.
We sat together for dinner and my dad told me about his broken hi-fi set.
The CD-Player was broken again and he wanted to fix it by switching the laser unit.
During the discussion i asked him why he even needed the CD-Player anyways?
His answer was simple, he doesnt!
His hi-fi set, tries to read CDs when powered on.
Since the CD-Player is broken and makes weird noises,
even if you dont play CDs.
He used his hi-fi set only to listen to a webradio stream,
which was played on an external web radio.
This external device also has speakers, but as usual they are crappy.
So we thought about it, opened up the hi-fi set and disconnected the CD-Player.
As the hi-fi set was open and parts scattered all around us,
i thought about placing a raspberry pi into the hi-fi set, connect it to the aux port and let it play the radio stream.
An initial prototyp was build quickly.
I controlled a vlc player with ssh which was the quickest solution i have thought of.
But since i am pretty sure my dad wouldnt want to login to the pi with SSH every morning just to turn on the radio,
i had to build something better!
Since the raspberry pi was already placed inside of the hi-fi set,
i could only access it over ssh.
But since i have VPN access to the raspberry pi,
i also could develop stuff from home and deploy it to the pi.

# Requirements
Since i had no pyhsical access to the raspberry pi,
i thought about having a web interface instead of a IR remote control.
The web interface should be accessible from a smartphone,
because my dad would not use his laptop before he had his first coffee.
And i didnt want to use any external service.
So lets sum it up:
- Web UI for control
- MP3 Streams provide the audio data
- Multiple Stations should be available

# Build
I thought about go at first, but i didnt find a good audio library for go.
A prototype with java worked good, so i started to setup a project
with spring boot, kotlin and sqlite.
This allowed me to create a simple rest api and use the native java audio framework.
After a few setbacks my curl requests worked and i could start and stop mp3 streams.
At this stage i started the development of the Web Interface, which is build with angular.
I dont think Angular is the best choice for this task,
but i already had some code from other projects and i like the angular material design library.

# Tests
Packed into a deb file, i installed rayd.io (at this point the name was decided) on the raspberry pi at my dads home.
I send him the link to the Web Interface and he tried 